Once upon a time there was a man who had three daughters. He was once
ordered to go away to work, and said the them, "Since I am about making a
journey, what do you want me to bring you when I return?"One asked for a handsome dress; the other, a fine hat and a beautiful
shawl. He said to the youngest, "And you, Cinderella, what do you want?"
They called her Cinderella because she always sat in the chimney corner."You must buy me a little bird Verdeliò.""The simpleton! She does not know what to do with the bird! Instead of
ordering a handsome dress, a fine shawl, she takes a bird. Who knows what
she will do with it!""Silence!" she says. "It pleases me."The father went, and on his return brought the dress, hat, and shawl
for the two sisters, and the little bird for Cinderella.The father was employed at the court, and one day the king said to him,
"I am going to give three balls; if you want to bring your daughters, do
so; they will amuse themselves a little.""As you wish," he replies, "thanks!" and accepts.He went home and said, "What do you think, girls? His majesty wishes
you to attend his ball.""There, you see, Cinderella, if you had only asked for a handsome
dress! This evening we are going to the ball."She replied, "It matters nothing to me! You go; I am not coming."In the evening, when the time came, they adorned themselves, saying to
Cinderella, "Come along, there will be room for you, too.""I don't want to go; you go; I don't want to.""But," said their father, "let us go, let us go! Dress and come along;
let her stay."When they had gone, she went to the bird and said, "O Bird
Verdeliò, make me more beautiful than I am!"She became clothed in a sea green dress, with so many diamonds that it
blinded you to behold her. The bird made ready two purses of money, and
said to her, "Take these two purses, enter your carriage, and away!"She set out for the ball, and left the bird Verdeliò at home.
She entered the ballroom. Scarcely had the gentlemen seen this beautiful
lady (she dazzled them on all sides), when the king, just think of it,
began to dance with her the whole evening. After he had danced with her
all the evening, his majesty stopped, and she stood by her sisters. While
she was at her sisters' side, she drew out her handkerchief, and a
bracelet fell out."Oh, Signora," said the eldest sister, "you have dropped this.""Keep it for yourself," she said."Oh, if Cinderella were only here, who knows what might not have
happened to her?"The king had given orders that when this lady went away they should
find out where she lived. After she had remained a little she left the
ball. You can imagine whether the servants were on the lookout! She
entered her carriage and away! She perceives that she is followed, takes
the money and begins to throw it out of the window of the carriage. The
greedy servants, I tell you, seeing all that money, thought no more of
her, but stopped to pick up the money. She returned home and went
upstairs."O Bird Verdeliò, make me homelier than I am!" You ought to see
how ugly, how horrid, she became, all ashes.When the sisters returned, they cried, "Cin-der-ella!""Oh, leave her alone," said her father. "She is asleep now, leave her
along!"But they went up and showed her the large and beautiful bracelet. "Do
you see, you simpleton? You might have had it.""It matters nothing to me."Their father said, "Let us go to supper, you little geese."Let us return to the king, who was awaiting her servants, who had not
the courage to appear, but kept away. He calls them. "How did the matter
go?"The fall at his feet. "Thus and thus! She threw out so much money!""Wretches, you are nothing else." he said. "Were you afraid of not
being rewarded? Well! tomorrow evening, attention, under pain of death."The next evening the usual ball. The sisters say, "Will you come this
evening, Cinderella?""Oh," she says, "don't bother me! I don't want to go."Their father cries out to them, "How troublesome you are! Let her
alone!"So they began to adorn themselves more handsomely than the former
evening, and departed. "Good-bye, Cinderella!"When they had gone, Cinderella went to the bird and said, "Little Bird
Verdeliò, make me more beautiful than I am!" Then she became
clothed in sea green, embroidered with all the fish of the sea, mingled
with diamonds more than you could believe.The bird said, "Take these two bags of sand, and when you are followed,
throw it out, and so they will be blinded."She entered her carriage and set out for the ball. As soon as his
majesty saw her he began to dance with her and danced as long as he could.
After he had danced as long as he could (she did not grow weary, but he
did), she placed herself near her sisters, drew out her handkerchief, and
there fell out a beautiful necklace all made of coal.The second sister said, "Signora, you have dropped this."She replied, "Keep it for yourself.""If Cinderella were here, who knows what might not happen to her!
Tomorrow she must come!"After a while she leaves the ball. The servants (just think, under pain
of death!) were all on the alert, and followed her. She began to throw out
all the sand, and they were blinded. She went home, dismounted, and went
upstairs."Little Bird Verdeliò, make me homelier than I am!" She became
frightfully homely.When her sisters returned they began from below, "Cin-der-ella! if you
only knew what that lady gave us!""It matters nothing to me!""Yes, yes! you would have had it!"The father says, "Let us go to supper and let her alone; you are really
silly!"Let us return to his majesty, who was waiting for his servants to learn
where she lived. Instead of that they were all brought back blinded, and
had to be accompanied. "Rogue!" he exclaimed, "either this lady is some
fairy or she must have some fairy who protects her."The next day the sisters began, "Cinderella, you must go this evening!
Listen; it is the last evening; you must come."The father: "Oh let her alone! You are always teasing her!"Then they went away and began to prepare for the ball. When they were
all prepared, they went to the ball with their father.When they had departed, Cinderella went to the bird: "Little Bird
Verdeliò, make me more beautiful than I am!" Then she was dressed
in all the colors of the heavens; all the comets, the stars, and moon on
her dress, and the sun on her brow. She enters the ballroom. Who could
look at her! For the sun alone they lower their eyes, and are all blinded.
His majesty began to dance, but he could not look at her, because she
dazzled him. He had already given orders to his servants to be on the
lookout, under pain of death, not to go on foot, but to mount their horses
that evening.After she had danced longer than on the previous evenings she placed
herself by her father's side, drew out her handkerchief, and there fell
out a snuffbox of gold, full of money."Signora, you have dropped this snuffbox.""Keep it for yourself!"Imagine that man. He opens it and sees it full of money. What a joy!After she had remained a time she went home as usual. The servants
followed her on horseback, quickly, at a distance from the carriage; but
on horseback that was not much trouble. She perceived that she had not
prepared anything to throw that evening."Oh!" she cried. "What shall I do?" She left the carriage quickly, and
in her haste lost one of her slippers. The servants picked it up, took the
number of the house, and went away.Cinderella went upstairs and said, "Little Bird Verdeliò, make
me more homely than I am!"The bird does not answer. After she had repeated it three or four
times, it answered, "Rogue! I ought not to make you more homely, but ..."
and she became homely and the bird continued, "What are you going to do
now? You are discovered."She began to weep in earnest. When her sisters returned they cried,
"Cin-der-ella!" You can imagine that she did not answer them this evening.
"See what a beautiful snuffbox. If you had gone you might have had it.""I do not care! Go away!"Then their father called them to supper.Let us now turn to the servants who went back with the slipper and the
number of the house."Tomorrow," said his majesty, "as soon as it is day, go to that house,
take a carriage, and bring that lady to the palace."The servants took the slipper and went away. The next morning they
knocked at the door. Cinderella's father looked out and exclaimed, "Oh
heavens! It is his majesty's carriage. What does it mean?" They open the
door and the servants ascend. "What do you want of me?" asked the father."How many daughters have you?""Two.""Well, show them to us."The father made them come in there."Sit down," they said to one of them. They tried the slipper on her; it
was ten times too large for her. The other one sat down; it was too small
for her. "But tell me, good man, have you no other daughters? Take care to
tell the truth! because majesty wishes it, under pain of death!""Gentlemen, there is another one, but I do not mention it. She is all
in the ashes, the coals. If you should see her! I do not call her my
daughter from shame.""We have not come for beauty, or for finery; we want to see the girl!"Her sisters began to call her, "Cin-der-ella!" but she did not answer.After a time she said, "What is the matter?""You must come down! There are some gentlemen who wish to see you.""I don't want to come.""But you must come, you see!""Very well; tell them I will come in a moment." She went to the little
bird: "Ah little Bird Verdeliò, make me more beautiful than I am!"
Then she was dressed as she had been the last evening, with the sun, and
moon, and stars, and in addition, great chains all of gold everywhere
about her.The bird said, "Take me away with you! Put me in your bosom!" She puts
the bird in her bosom and begins to descend the stairs."Do you hear her?" said the father. "Do you hear her? She is dragging
with her the chains from the chimney corner. You can imagine how frightful
she will look!"When she reached the last step, and they saw her, "Ah!" they exclaimed,
and recognized the lady of the ball. You can imagine how her father and
sisters were vexed. They made her sit down, and tried on the slipper, and
it fitted her. Then they made her enter the carriage, and took her to his
majesty, who recognized the lady of the other evenings. And you can
imagine that, all in love as her was, he said to her, "Will you really be
my wife?"You may believe she consents. She sends for her father and sisters, and
makes them all come to the palace. They celebrate the marriage. Imagine
what fine festivals were given at this wedding! The servants who had
discovered where Cinderella lived were promoted to the highest positions
in the palace as a reward.Source: Thomas Frederick Crane,Italian Popular Tales(London: Macmillan and Company, 1885),no. 9, pp. 42-47.Return to thetable of contents.Little SaddleslutGreeceThere were once three sisters spinning flax, and they said, "Whosever spindle falls, let us kill her and eat her."The mother's spindle fell, and they left her alone.Again they sat down to spin, and again the mother's spindle fell, and again and yet again."Ah, well!" said they, "let us eat her now!""No!" said the youngest, "do not eat her; eat me, if flesh you will have."But they would not; and two of them killed their mother and cooked her for eating.When they had sat down to make a meal of her, they said to the youngest, "Come and eat too!"But she refused, and sat down on a saddle which the fowls were covering with filth, and wept, and upbraided them.Many a time they said to her, "Come and eat!" but she would not; and when they had done eating, they all went away.Then the youngest, whom they called Little Saddleslut, gathered all the bones together and buried them underneath the grate, and smoked them every day with incense for forty days; and after the forty days were out, she went to take them away and put them in another place. And when she lifted up the stone, she was astonished at the rays of light which it sent forth, and raiment was found there, like unto the heavens and the stars, the spring with its flowers, the sea with its waves; and many coins of every kind; and she left them where she found them.Afterwards her sisters came and found her sitting on the saddle, and jeered at her. On Sunday her sisters went to church; then she, too, arose; she washed and attired herself, putting on the garment that was as the heavens with the stars, and went to church, taking with her a few gold pieces in her purse. When she went into the church all the people were amazed, and could not gaze upon her by reason of the brightness of her garments. When she left the church, the people followed her to see whither she went. Then she filled her hand with money from her bag and cast it in the way, and so she kept throwing it down all the way she went, so that they might not get near her. Then the crowd scrambled for the coins, and left her alone. And straightway she went into her house, and changed her clothes, and put on her old things, and sat down upon the saddle.Her sisters came home from church and said to her, "Where are you, wretch? Come and let us tell you how there came into the church a maiden more glorious than the sun, who had such garments on as you could not look on, so brightly did they gleam and shine, and she strewed money on the way! Look, see what a lot we have picked up! Why did not you come too? Worse luck to you!""You are welcome to what you picked up; I don't want it," said she.Next Sunday they went to church again, and she did the same. Then they went another Sunday, and just as she was flinging the money, she lost her shoe among the crowd, and left it behind her.Now the king's son was following her, but could not catch her, and only found her shoe. Then said he to himself, "Whose ever foot this shoe exactly fits, without being either too large or too small, I will take her for my wife."And he went to all the women he knew and tried it on, but could not manage to fit it. Then her sisters came to her and spoke as follows to her, "You go and try; perhaps it will fit you!""Get away with you!" said she. "Do you think he will put the shoe on me, and get it covered with filth? Do not make fun of me."The prince had taken all the houses in turn, and so he came at length to the house of Little Saddleslut, and his servants told her to come and try on the shoe."Do not make fun of me," she says.However she went down, and when the prince saw her, he knew the shoe was hers, and said to her, "Do you try on the shoe."And with the greatest ease she put it on, and it fitted her.Then said the prince to her, "I will take you to wife.""Do not make fun of me," she answered, "so may your youth be happy!""Nay, but I will marry you," said he, and he took her and made her his wife.Then she put on her fairest robes. When a little child was born to her, the sisters came to see it. And when she was helpless and alone they took her and put her into a chest, and carried her off and threw her into a river, and the river cast her forth upon a desert.There was a half-witted old woman there, and when she saw the chest, she thought to cut it up [for firewood] and took it away for that purpose. And when she had broken it open, and saw someone alive in it, she got up and made off.So the princess was left alone, and heard the wolves howling, and the swine and the lions, and she sat and wept and prayed to God, "Oh God, give me a little hole in the ground that I may hide my head in it, and not hear the wild beasts," and he gave her one.Again she said, "Oh God, give me one a little larger, that I may get in up to my waist."And he gave her one. And she besought him again a third time, and he gave her a cabin with all that she wanted in it; and there she dwelt, and whatever she said, her bidding was done forthwith.For instance, when she wanted to eat, she would say, "Come, table with all that is wanted! Come food! Come spoons and forks, and all things needful," and straightway they all got ready, and when she finished the would ask, "Are you all there?" and they would answer, "We are."One day the prince came into the wilderness to hunt, and seeing the cabin he went to find out who was inside; and when he got there he knocked at the door.And she saw him and knew him from afar, and said, "Who is knocking at the door?""It is I, let me in," said he."Open, doors!" said she, and in a twinkling the doors opened and he entered. He went upstairs and found her seated on a chair."Good day to you," said he."Welcome!" said she, and straightway all that was in the room cried out, "Welcome!""Come chair!" she cried, and one came at once."Sit down," she said to him and down he sat. And when she had asked him the reason of his coming, she bade him stay and dine, and afterwards depart.He agreed, and straightway she gave her orders: "Come table with all the covers," and forthwith they presented themselves, and he was sore amazed."Come basin," she cried. "Come jug, pour water for us to wash! Come food in ten courses!" and immediately all that she ordered made its appearance.Afterwards when the meal was ended, the prince tried to hide a spoon, and put it into his shoe; and when they rose from table, she said "Table, have you all your covers?""Yes I have."
"Spoons, are you all there?""All," they said, except one which said "I am in the prince's shoe."Then she cried again, as though she had not heard, "Are you all there, spoons and forks?"And as soon as the prince heard her he got rid of it on the sly and blushed.And she said to him "Why did you blush? Don't be afraid. I am your wife."Then she told him how she got there and how she fared. And they hugged and kissed each other, and she ordered the house to move and it did move. And when they came near the town all the world came out to see them. Then the prince gave orders for his wife's sisters to be brought before him, and they brought them and he hewed them in pieces. And so henceforward they lived happily, and may we live more happily still.Source: Edmund Martin Geldart,Folk-Lore of Modern Greece: The Tales of the People(London: W. Swan Sonnenschein and Company, 1884),pp. 27-30.Return to thetable of contents.Conkiajgharuna, the Little Rag GirlGeorgiaThere was and there was not, there was a miserable peasant. He had a wife
and a little daughter. So poor was this peasant that his daughter was
called Conkiajgharuna (Little Rag Girl).Some time passed, and his wife died. He was unhappy before, but now a
greater misfortune had befallen him. He grieved and grieved, and at last
he said to himself, "I will go and take another wife; she will mind the
house, and tend my orphan child." So he arose and took a second wife, but
this wife brought with her a daughter of her own. When this woman came
into her husband's house and saw his child, she was angry in heart.She treated Little Rag Girl badly. She petted her own daughter, but
scolded her stepdaughter, and tried to get rid of her. Every day she gave
her a piece of badly cooked bread, and sent her out to watch the cow,
saying, "Here is a loaf; eat of it, give to every wayfarer, and bring the
loaf home whole." The girl went, and felt very miserable.Once she was sitting sadly in the field, and began to weep bitterly.
The cow listened, and then opened its mouth, and said, "Why are you
weeping? What troubles you?" The girl told her sad tale. The cow said, "In
one of my horns is honey, and in the other is butter, which you can take
if you want to, so why be unhappy?" The girl took the butter and the
honey, and in a short time she grew plump. When the stepmother noticed
this she did not know what to do for rage. She rose, and after that every
day she gave her a basket of wool with her; this wool was to be spun and
brought home in the evening finished. The stepmother wished to tire the
girl out with toil, so that she should grow thin and ugly.Once when Little Rag Girl was tending the cow, it ran away onto a roof.
[In some parts of the Caucasus the houses of the peasantry are built in
the ground, and it is quite possible to walk onto a roof unwittingly.
(Note by Wardrop)] She pursued it, and wished to drive it back to the
road, but she dropped her spindle on the roof. Looking inside she saw an
old woman seated, and said to her, "Good mother, will you give me my
spindle?"The old dame replied, "I am not able, my child, come and take it
yourself." The old woman was adevi.The girl went in and was lifting up her spindle, when the old dame
called out, "Daughter, daughter, come and look at my head a moment. I am
almost eaten up."The girl came and looked at her head. She was filled with horror; all
the worms in the earth seemed to be crawling there. The little girl
stroked her head and removed some, and then said, "You have a clean head.
Why should I look at it?"This conduct pleased the old woman very much, and she said, "When you
leave here, go along such and such a road, and in a certain place you will
see three springs -- one white, one black, and one yellow. Pass by the
white and black, and put your head in the yellow and rinse it with your
hands."The girl did this. She went on her way, and came to the three springs.
She passed by the white and black, and bathed her head with her hands in
the yellow fountain. When she looked up she saw that her hair was quite
golden, and her hands, too, shone like gold. In the evening, when she went
home, her stepmother was filled with fury. After this she sent her own
daughter with the cow. Perhaps the same good fortune would visit her!So Little Rag Girl stayed at home while her stepsister drove out the
cow. Once more the cow ran onto the roof. The girl pursued it, and her
spindle fell down. She looked in, and seeing thedeviwoman, called
out, "Dog of an old woman! Here! Come and give me my spindle!"The old woman replied, "I am not able, child, come and take it
yourself." When the girl came near, the old woman said, "Come, child, and
look at my head."The girl came and looked at her head, and cried out, "Ugh! What a
horrid head you have! You are a disgusting old woman!"The old woman said, "I thank you, my child; when you go on your way you
will see a yellow, a white, and a black spring. Pass by the yellow and the
white springs, and rinse your head with your hands in the black one."The girl did this. She passed by the yellow and white springs, and
bathed her head in the black once. When she looked at herself she was
black as an African, and on her head there was a horn. She cut it off
again and again, but it grew larger and larger.She went home and complained to her mother, who was almost frenzied,
but there was no help for it. Her mother said to herself, "This is all the
cow's fault, so it shall be killed."This cow knew the future. When it learned that it was to be killed, it
went to Little Rag Girl and said, "When I am dead, gather my bones
together and bury them in the earth. When you are in trouble come to my
grave, and cry aloud, 'Bring my steed and my royal robes!'" Little Rag
Girl did exactly as the cow had told her. When it was dead she took its
bones and buried them in the earth.After this, some time passed. One holiday the stepmother took her
daughter, and they went to church. She placed a trough in front of Little
Rag Girl, spread a large measure of millet in the courtyard, and said,
"Before we come home from church fill this trough with tears, and gather
up this millet, so that not one grain is left." Then they went to church.Little Rag Girl sat down and began to weep. While she was crying a
neighbor came in a said, "Why are you in tears? What is the matter?" The
little girl told her tale. The woman brought all the brood hens and
chicken, and they picked up every grain of millet, then she put a lump of
salt in the trough and poured water over it. "There, child," said she,
"there are your tears! Now go and enjoy yourself."Little Rag Girl then thought of the cow. She went to its grave and
called out, "Bring me my steed and my royal robes!" There appeared at once
a horse and beautiful clothes. Little Rag Girl put on the garments,
mounted the horse, and went to the church.There all the folk began to stare at her. They were amazed at her
grandeur. Her stepsister whispered to her mother when she saw her, "This
girl is very much like our Little Rag Girl!"Her mother smiled scornfully and said, "Who would give that sun
darkener such robes?"Little Rag Girl left the church before anyone else; she changed her
clothes in time to appear before her stepmother in rags. On the way home,
as she was leaping over a stream, in her haste she let her slipper fall
in.A long time passed. Once when the king's horses were drinking water in
this stream, they saw the shining slipper and were so afraid that they
would drink no more water. The king was told that there was something
shining in the stream, and that the horses were afraid.The king commanded his divers to find out what it was. They found the
golden slipper, and presented it to the king. When he saw it, he commanded
his viziers, saying, "Go and seek the owner of this slipper, for I will
wed none but her." His viziers sought the maiden, but they could find no
one whom the slipper would fit.Little Rag Girl's mother heard this, adorned her daughter, and placed
her on a throne. Then she went and told the king that she had a daughter
whose foot he might look at. It was exactly the model for the shoe. She
put Little Rag Girl in a corner, with a big basket over her. When the king
came into the house he sat down on the basket, in order to try on the
slipper.Little Rag Girl took a needle and pricked the king from under the
basket. He jumped up, stinging with pain, and asked the stepmother what
she had under the basket. The stepmother replied, "It is only a turkey I
have there."The king sat down on the basket again, and Little Rag Girl again stuck
the needle into him. The king jumped up, and cried out, "Lift the basket.
I will see underneath!"The stepmother pleaded with him, saying, "Do not blame me, your
majesty, it is only a turkey, and it will run away."But the king would not listen to her pleas. He lifted the basket up,
and Little Rag Girl came forth, and said, "This slipper is mine, and fits
me well." She sat down, and the king found that it was indeed a perfect
fit. Little Rag Girl became the king's wife, and her shameless stepmother
was left with a dry throat.Source: Marjory Wardrop,Georgian Folk Tales(London: David
Nutt, 1894),pp. 63-67.Wardrop's heroine and the story itself are both named
"Conkiajgharuna," which means "the little girl in rags."This story combines important motifs from type 480 ("Frau Holle") and
type 510A ("Cinderella").Return to thetable of contents.PepelyougaSerbiaOn a high pasture land, near an immense precipice, some maidens were
occupied in spinning and attending to their grazing cattle, when an old
strange looking man with a white beard reaching down to his girdle
approached, and said, "Oh fair maidens, beware of the abyss, for if one of
you should drop her spindle down the cliff, her mother would be turned
into a cow that very moment!"So saying the aged man disappeared, and the girls, bewildered by his
words, and discussing the strange incident, approached near to the ravine
which had suddenly become interesting to them. They peered curiously over
the edge, as though expecting to see some unaccustomed sight, when
suddenly the most beautiful of the maidens let her spindle drop from her
hand, and before she could recover it, it was bounding from rock to rock
into the depths beneath. When she returned home that evening she found her
worst fears realized, for her mother stood before the door transformed
into a cow.A short time later her father married again. His new wife was a widow,
and brought a daughter of her own into her new home. This girl was not
particularly well favored, and her mother immediately began to hate her
stepdaughter because of the latter's good looks. She forbade her
henceforth to wash her face, to comb her hair or to change her clothes,
and in every way she could think of she sought to make her miserable.One morning she gave her a bag filled with hemp, saying, "If you do not
spin this and make a fine top of it by tonight, you need not return home,
for I intend to kill you."The poor girl, deeply dejected, walked behind the cattle, industriously
spinning as she went, but by noon when the cattle lay down in the shade to
rest, she observed that she had made but little progress and she began to
weep bitterly.Now, her mother was driven daily to pasture with the other cows, and
seeing her daughter's tears she drew near and asked why she wept,
whereupon the maiden told her all. Then the cow comforted her daughter,
saying, "My darling child, be consoled! Let me take the hemp into my mouth
and chew it; through my ear a thread will come out. You must take the end
of this and wind it into a top." So this was done; the hemp was soon spun,
and when the girl gave it to her stepmother that evening, she was greatly
surprised.Next morning the woman roughly ordered the maiden to spin a still
larger bag of hemp, and as the girl, thanks to her mother, spun and wound
it all, her stepmother, on the following day, gave her twice the quantity
to spin. Nevertheless, the girl brought home at night even that unusually
large quantity well spun, and her stepmother concluded that the poor girl
was not spinning alone, but that other maidens, her friends, were giving
her help. Therefore she, next morning, sent her own daughter to spy upon
the poor girl and to report what she saw. The girl soon noticed that the
cow helped the poor orphan by chewing the hemp, while she drew the thread
and wound it on a top, and she ran back home and informed her mother of
what she had seen. Upon this, the stepmother insisted that her husband
should order that particular cow to be slaughtered. Her husband at first
hesitated, but as his wife urged him more and more, he finally decided to
do as she wished.On learning what had been decided, the stepdaughter wept more than
ever, and when her mother asked what was the matter, she told her
tearfully all that had been arranged. Thereupon the cow said to her
daughter, "Wipe away your tears, and do not cry any more. When they
slaughter me, you must take great care not to eat any of the meat, but
after the repast, carefully collect my bones and inter them behind the
house under a certain stone; then, should you ever be in need of help,
come to my grave and there you will find it."The cow was killed, and when the meat was served the poor girl declined
to eat of it, pretending that she had no appetite; after the meal she
gathered with great care all the bones and buried them on the spot
indicated by her mother.Now, the name of the maiden was Marra, but, as she had to do the
roughest work of the house, such as carrying water, washing, and sweeping,
she was called by her stepmother and stepsister Pepelyouga (Cinderella).One Sunday, when the stepmother and her daughter had dressed themselves
for church, the woman spread about the house the contents of a basktetful
of millet, and said, "Listen, Pepelyouga; if you do not gather up all this
millet and have dinner ready by the time we return from church, I will
kill you!"When they had gone, the poor girl began to weep, reflecting, "As to the
dinner I can easily prepare it, but how can I possibly gather up all this
millet?" But that very moment she recalled the words of the cow, that, if
she ever should be struck by misfortune, she need but walk to the grave
behind the house, when she would find instant help there. Immediately she
ran out, and, when she approached the grave, lo! a chest was lying on the
grave wide open, and inside were beautiful dresses and everything
necessary for a lady's toilet. Two doves were sitting on the lid of the
chest, and as the girl drew near, they said to her, "Marra, take from the
chest the dress you like the best, clothe yourself, and go to church. As
to the millet and other work, we ourselves will attend to that and see
that everything is in good order!"Marra needed no second invitation; she took the first silk dress she
touched, made her toilet, and went to church, where her entrance created
quite a sensation. Everybody, men and women, greatly admired her beauty
and her costly attire, but they were puzzled as to who she was, and where
she came from. A prince happened to be in the church on that day, and he,
too, admired the beautiful maiden.Just before the service ended, the girl stole from the church, went
hurriedly home, took off her beautiful clothes and placed them back in the
chest, which instantly shut and became invisible. She then rushed to the
kitchen, where she discovered that the dinner was quite ready, and that
the millet was gathered into the basket. Soon the stepmother came back
with her daughter, and they were astounded to find the millet gathered up,
dinner prepared, and everything else in order. A desire to learn the
secret now began to torment the stepmother mightily.Next Sunday everything happened as before, except that the girl found
in the chest a silver dress, and that the prince felt a greater admiration
for her, so much so that he was unable, even for a moment to take his eyes
from her. On the third Sunday, the mother and daughter again prepared to
go to church, and, having scattered the millet as before, she repeated her
previous threats. As soon as they disappeared, the girl ran straight to
her mother's grave, where she found, as on the previous occasions, the
open chest and the same two doves. This time she found a dress made of
gold lace, and she hastily clad herself in it and went to church, where
she was admired by all, even more than before. As for the czar's son, he
had come with the intention not to let her this time out of his sight, but
to follow and see where she went. Accordingly, as the service drew near to
its close, and the maiden withdrew quietly as before, the enamored prince
followed after her. Marra hurried along, for she had none too much time,
and, as she went, one of her golden slippers came off, and she was too
agitated to stop and pick it up. The prince, however, who had lost sight
of the maiden, saw the slipper and put it in his pocket. Reaching home,
Marra took off her golden dress, laid it in the chest, and rushed back to
the house.The prince now resolved to go from house to house throughout his
father's realm in search of the owner of the slipper, inviting all the
fair maidens to try on the golden slipper. But, alas! his efforts seemed
to be doomed to failure; for some girls the slipper was too long, for
others too short, for others, again, too narrow. There was no one whom it
would fit.Wandering from door to door, the sad prince at length came to the house
of Marra's father. The stepmother was expecting him, and she had hidden
her stepdaughter under a large trough in the courtyard. When the prince
asked whether she had any daughters, the stepmother answered that she had
but one, and she presented the girl to him. The prince requested the girl
to try on the slipper, but, squeeze as she would, there was not room in it
even for her toes! Thereupon the prince asked whether it was true that
there were no other girls in the house, and the stepmother replied that
indeed it was quite true.That very moment a cock flew onto the trough and crowed out lustily,
"Kook-oo-ryeh-koooo!Here she is under this very trough!"The stepmother, enraged, exclaimed, "Sh! Go away! May an eagle seize
you and fly off with you!" The curiosity of the prince was aroused. He
approached the trough, lifted it up, and, to his great surprise, there was
the maiden whom he had seen three times in church, clad in the very same
golden dress she had last worn, and having only one golden slipper.When the prince recognized the maiden he was overcome with joy. Quickly
he tried the slipper on her dainty foot. It not only fit her admirably,
but it exactly matched the one she already wore on her left foot. He
lifted her up tenderly and escorted her to his palace. Later he won her
love, and they were happily married.Source: Woislav M. Petrovitch,Hero Tales and Legends of the Serbians(New York: Frederick A. Stokes Company, preface dated 1914),pp. 224-30.Link to another translation of this tale, here titled "Papalluga; or, The Golden Slipper":Serbian Folk-Lore: Popular Tales, selected and translated by Madam Csedomille Mijatovies, edited, with an introduction by W. Denton (London: W. Isbister and Company, 1874),pp. 59-66.Return to thetable of contents.The Wonderful BirchRussiaOnce upon a time there were a man and a woman, who had an only daughter.
Now it happened that one of their sheep went astray, and they set out to
look for it, and searched and searched, each in n different part of the
wood. Then the good wife met a witch, who said to her, "If you spit, you
miserable creature, if you spit into the sheath of my knife, or if you run
between my legs, I shall change you into a black sheep."The woman neither spat, nor did she run between her legs, but yet the
witch changed her into a sheep. Then she made herself look exactly like
the woman, and called out to the good man, "Ho, old man, halloa! I have
found the sheep already!"The man thought the witch was really his wife, and he did not know that
his wife was the sheep; so he went home with her, glad at heart because
his sheep was found. When they were safe at home the witch said to the
man, "Look here, old man, we must really kill that sheep lest it run away
to the wood again."The man, who was a peaceable quiet sort of fellow, made no objections,
but simply said, "Good, let us do so."The daughter, however, had overheard their talk, and she ran to the
flock and lamented aloud, "Oh, dear little mother, they are going to
slaughter you!""Well, then, if they do slaughter me," was the black sheep's answer,
"eat you neither the meat nor the broth that is made of me, but gather all
my bones, and bury them by the edge of the field."Shortly after this they took the black sheep from the flock and
slaughtered it. The witch made pease-soup of it, and set it before the
daughter. But the girl remembered her mother's warning.She did not touch the soup, but she carried the bones to the edge of
the field and buried them there; and there sprang up on the spot a birch
tree -- a very lovely birch tree.Some time had passed away -- who can tell how long they might have been
living there? -- when the witch, to whom a child had been born in the
meantime, began to take an ill-will to the man's daughter, and to torment
her in all sorts of ways.Now it happened that a great festival was to be held at the palace, and
the king had commanded that all the people should be invited, and that
this proclamation should be made:Come, people all!Poor and wretched, one and all!Blind and crippled though ye be,Mount your steeds or come by sea.And so they drove into the king's feast all the outcasts, and the
maimed, and the halt, and the blind. In the good man's house, too,
preparations were made to go to the palace. The witch said to the man, "Go
you on in front, old man, with our youngest; I will give the elder girl
work to keep her from being dull in our absence."So the man took the child and set out. But the witch kindled a fire on
the hearth, threw a potful of barleycorns among the cinders, and said to
the girl, "If you have not picked the barley out of the ashes, and put it
all back in the pot before nightfall, I shall eat you up!"Then she hastened after the others, and the poor girl stayed at home
and wept. She tried to be sure to pick up the grains of barley, but she
soon saw how useless her labor was; and so she went in her sore trouble to
the birch tree on her mother's grave, and cried and cried, because her
mother lay dead beneath the sod and could help her no longer. In the midst
of her grief she suddenly heard her mother's voice speak from the grave,
and say to her, "Why do you weep, little daughter?""The witch has scattered barleycorns on the hearth, and bid me pick
them out of the ashes," said the girl; "that is why I weep, dear little
mother.""Do not weep," said her mother consolingly. "Break off one of my
branches, and strike the hearth with it crosswise, and all will be put
right."The girl did so. She struck the hearth with the birchen branch, and lo!
the barleycorns flew into the pot, and the hearth was clean. Then she went
back to the birch tree and laid the branch upon the grave. Then her mother
bade her bathe on one side of the stem, dry herself on another, and dress
on the third. When the girl had done all that, she had grown so lovely
that no one on earth could rival her. Splendid clothing was given to her,
and a horse, with hair partly of gold, partly of silver, and partly of
something more precious still. The girl sprang into the saddle, and rode
as swift as an arrow to the palace.As she turned into the courtyard of the castle the king's son came out
to meet her, tied her steed to a pillar, and led her in. He never left her
side as they passed through the castle rooms; and all the people gazed at
her, and wondered who the lovely maiden was, and from what castle she
came; but no one knew her -- no one knew anything about her. At the
banquet the prince invited her to sit next him in the place of honor; but
the witch's daughter gnawed the bones under the table. The prince did not
see her, and thinking it was a dog, he gave her such a push with his foot
that her arm was broken. Are you not sorry for the witch's daughter? It
was not her fault that her mother was a witch.Towards evening the good man's daughter thought it was time to go home;
but as she went, her ring caught on the latch of the door, for the king's
son had had it smeared with tar. She did not take time to pull it off,
but, hastily unfastening her horse from the pillar, she rode away beyond
the castle walls as swift as an arrow. Arrived at home, she took off her
clothes by the birch tree, left her horse standing there, and hastened to
her place behind the stove. In a short time the man and the woman came
home again too, and the witch said to the girl, "Ah! you poor thing, there
you are to be sure! You don't know what fine times we have had at the
palace! The king's son carried my daughter about, but the poor thing fell
and broke her arm."The girl knew well how matters really stood, but she pretended to know
nothing about it, and sat dumb behind the stove.The next day they were invited again to the king's banquet."Hey! old man," said the witch, "get on your clothes as quick as you
can; we are bidden to the feast. Take you the child; I will give the other
one work, lest she weary."She kindled the fire, threw a potful of hemp seed among the ashes, and
said to the girl, "If you do not get this sorted, and all the seed back
into the pot, I shall kill you!"The girl wept bitterly; then she went to the birch tree, washed herself
on one side of it and dried herself on the other; and this time still
finer clothes were given to her, and a very beautiful steed. She broke off
a branch of the birch tree, struck the hearth with it, so that the seeds
flew into the pot, and then hastened to the castle.Again the king's son came out to meet her, tied her horse to a pillar,
and led her into the banqueting hall. At the feast the girl sat next him
in the place of honor, as she had done the day before. But the witch's
daughter gnawed bones under the table, and the prince gave her a push by
mistake, which broke her leg -- he had never noticed her crawling about
among the people's feet. She wasveryunlucky!The good man's daughter hastened home again betimes, but the king's son
had smeared the door-posts with tar, and the girl's golden circlet stuck
to it. She had not time to look for it, but sprang to the saddle and rode
like an arrow to the birch tree. There she left her horse and her fine
clothes, and said to her mother, "I have lost my circlet at the castle; 
the door-post was tarred, and it stuck fast.""And even had you lost two of them," answered her mother, "I would give
you finer ones."Then the girl hastened home, and when her father came home from the
feast with the witch, she was in her usual place behind the stove. Then
the witch said to her, "You poor thing! what is there to see here compared
with whatwehave seen at the palace? The king's son carried my
daughter from one room to another; he let her fall, 'tis true, and my
child's foot was broken."The man's daughter held her peace all the time, and busied herself
about the hearth.The night passed, and when the day began to dawn, the witch awakened
her husband, crying, "Hi! get up, old man! We are bidden to the royal
banquet."So the old man got up. Then the witch gave him the child, saying, "Take
you the little one; I will give the other girl work to do, else she will
weary at home alone."She did as usual. This time it was a dish of milk she poured upon the
ashes, saying, "If you do not get all the milk into the dish again before 
I come home, you will suffer for it."How frightened the girl was this time! She ran to the birch tree, and
by its magic power her task was accomplished; and then she rode away to
the palace as before. When she got to the courtyard she found the prince
waiting for her. He led her into the hall, where she was highly honored;
but the witch's daughter sucked the bones under the table, and crouching
at the people's feet she got an eye knocked out, poor thing! Now no one
knew any more than before about the good man's daughter, no one knew
whence she came; but the prince had had the threshold smeared with tar,
and as she fled her gold slippers stuck to it. She reached the birch tree,
and laying aside her finery, she said, "Alas I dear little mother, I have
lost my gold slippers!""Let them be," was her mother's reply; "if you need them I shall give
you finer ones."Scarcely was she in her usual place behind the stove when her father
came home with the witch. Immediately the witch began to mock her,
saying, "Ah! you poor thing, there is nothing for you to see here, andwe-- ah: what great things we have seen at the palace! My little
girl was carried about again, but had the ill-luck to fall and get her eye
knocked out. You stupid thing, you, what do you know about anything?""Yes, indeed, what can I know?" replied the girl; "I had enough to do
to get the hearth clean."Now the prince had kept all the things the girl had lost, and he soon
set about finding the owner of them. For this purpose a great banquet was
given on the fourth day, and all the people were invited to the palace.
The witch got ready to go too. She tied a wooden beetle on where her
child's foot should have been, a log of wood instead of an arm, and stuck
a bit of dirt in the empty socket for an eye, and took the child with her
to the castle. When all the people were gathered together, the king's son
stepped in among the crowd and cried, "The maiden whose finger this ring
slips over, whose head this golden hoop encircles, and whose foot this
shoe fits, shall be my bride."What a great trying on there was now among them all! The things would
fit no one, however."The cinder wench is not here," said the prince at last; "go and fetch
her, and let her try on the things."So the girl was fetched, and the prince was just going to hand the
ornaments to her, when the witch held him back, saying, "Don't give them 
to
her; she soils everything with cinders; give them to my daughter rather."Well, then the prince gave the witch's daughter the ring, and the woman
filed and pared away at her daughter's finger till the ring fitted. It was
the same with the circlet and the shoes of gold. The witch would not allow
them to be handed to the cinder wench; she worked at her own daughter's
head and feet till she got the things forced on. What was to be done now?
The prince had to take the witch's daughter for his bride whether he would
or no; he sneaked away to her father's house with her, however, for he was
ashamed to hold the wedding festivities at the palace with so strange a
bride. Some days passed, and at last he had to take his bride home to the
palace, and he got ready to do so. Just as they were taking leave, the
kitchen wench sprang down from her place by the stove, on the pretext of
fetching something from the cowhouse, and in going by she whispered in the
prince's ear as he stood in the yard, "Alas! dear prince, do not rob me of
my silver and my gold."Thereupon the king's son recognized the cinder wench; so he took both
the girls with him, and set out. After they had gone some little way they
came to the bank of a river, and the prince threw the witch's daughter
across to serve as a bridge, and so got over with the cinder wench. There
lay the witch's daughter then, like a bridge over the river, and could not
stir, though her heart was consumed with grief. No help was near, so she
cried at last in her anguish, "May there grow a golden hemlock out of my
body! Perhaps my mother will know me by that token."Scarcely had she spoken when a golden hemlock sprang up from her, and
stood upon the bridge.Now, as soon as the prince had got rid of the witch's daughter he
greeted the cinder wench as his bride, and they wandered together to the
birch tree which grew upon the mother's grave. There they received all
sorts of treasures and riches, three sacks full of gold, and as much
silver, and a splendid steed, which bore them home to the palace. There
they lived a long time together, and the young wife bore a son to the
prince. Immediately word was brought to the witch that her daughter had
borne a son -- for they all believed the young king's wife to be the
witch's daughter."So, so," said the witch to herself; "I had better away with my gift
for the infant, then."And so saying she set out. Thus it happened that she came to the bank
of the river, and there she saw the beautiful golden hemlock growing in
the middle of the bridge, and when she began to cut it down to take to her
grandchild, she heard a voice moaning, "Alas! dear mother, do not cut me
so!""Are you here?" demanded the witch."Indeed I am, dear little mother," answered the daughter "They threw me
across the river to make a bridge of me."In a moment the witch had the bridge shivered to atoms, and then she
hastened away to the palace. Stepping up to the young Queen's bed, she
began to try her magic arts upon her, saying, "Spit, you wretch, on the
blade of my knife; bewitch my knife's blade for me, and I shall change you
into a reindeer of the forest.""Are you there again to bring trouble upon me?" said the young woman.She neither spat nor did anything else, but still the witch changed her
into a reindeer, and smuggled her own daughter into her place as the
prince's wife. But now the child grew restless and cried, because it
missed its mother's care. They took it to the court, and tried to pacify
it in every conceivable way, but its crying never ceased."What makes the child so restless?" asked the prince, and he went to a
wise widow woman to ask her advice."Ay, ay, your own wife is not at home," said the widow woman; "she is
living like a reindeer in the wood; you have the witch's daughter for a
wife now, and the witch herself for a mother-in- law.""Is there any way of getting my own wife back from the wood again?"
asked the prince."Give me the child," answered the widow woman. "I'll take it with me
tomorrow when I go to drive the cows to the wood. I'll make a rustling
among the birch leaves and a trembling among the aspens -- perhaps the boy
will grow quiet when he hears it.""Yes, take the child away, take it to the wood with you to quiet it,"
said the prince, and led the widow woman into the castle."How now? you are going to send the child away to the wood?" said the
witch in a suspicious tone, and tried to interfere.But the king's son stood firm by what he had commanded, and said, 
"Carry the child about the wood; perhaps that will pacify it."So the widow woman took the child to the wood. She came to the edge of
a marsh, and seeing a herd of reindeer there, she began all at once to
sing:Little Bright-eyes, little Redskin,Come nurse the child you bore!That bloodthirsty monster,That man-eater grim,Shall nurse him, shall tend him no more.They may threaten and force as they will,He turns from her, shrinks from her still,and immediately the reindeer drew near, and nursed and tended the child
the whole day long; but at nightfall it had to follow the herd, and said
to the widow woman, "Bring me the child tomorrow, and again the following
day; after that I must wander with the herd far away to other lands."The following morning the widow woman went back to the castle to fetch
the child. The witch interfered, of course, but the prince said, "Take it,
and carry it about in the open air; the boy is quieter at night, to be
sure, when he has been in the wood all day."So the widow took the child in her arms, and carried it to the marsh in
the forest. There she sang as on the preceding day:Little Bright-eyes, little Redskin,Come nurse the child you bore!That bloodthirsty monster,That man-eater grim,Shall nurse him, shall tend him no more.They may threaten and force as they will,He turns from her, shrinks from her still,and immediately the reindeer left the herd and came to the child, and
tended it as on the day before. And so it was that the child throve, till
not a finer boy was to be seen anywhere. But the king's son had been
pondering over all these things, and he said to the widow woman, "Is there
no way of changing the reindeer into a human being again?""I don't rightly know," was her answer. "Come to the wood with me,
however; when the woman puts off her reindeer skin I shall comb her head
for her; whilst I am doing so you must burn the skin."Thereupon they both went to the wood with the child; scarcely were they
there when the reindeer appeared and nursed the child as before. Then the
widow woman said to the reindeer, "Since you are going far away tomorrow,
and I shall not see you again, let me comb your head for the last time, as
a remembrance of you."Good; the young woman stripped off the reindeer skin, and let the widow
woman do as she wished. In the meantime the king's son threw the reindeer
skin into the fire unobserved."What smells of singeing here?" asked the young woman, and looking
round she saw her own husband. "Woe is me! you have burnt my skin. Why did
you do that?""To give you back your human form again.""Alack-a-day! I have nothing to cover me now, poor creature that I am!"
cried the young woman, and transformed herself first into a distaff, then
into a wooden beetle, then into a spindle, and into all imaginable shapes.
But all these shapes the king's son went on destroying till she stood
before him in human form again."Alas! wherefore take me home with you again," cried the young woman,
"since the witch is sure to eat me up?""She will not eat you up," answered her husband; and they started for
home with the child.But when the witch wife saw them she ran away with her daughter, and if
she has not stopped she is running still, though at a great age. And the
prince, and his wife, and the baby lived happy ever afterwards.Source: Andrew Lang,The Red Fairy Book, 5th ed. (London: Longmans, Green, and Company, 1890),pp. 123-32.Lang's source: "From the Russo-Karelian."Return to thetable of contents.The Baba YagaRussia (Aleksandr Afanasyev)Once upon a time there was an old couple. The husband lost his wife and
married again. But he had a daughter by the first marriage, a young girl,
and she found no favor in the eyes of her evil stepmother, who used to
beat her, and consider how she could get her killed outright. One day the
father went away somewhere or other, so the stepmother said to the girl,
"Go to your aunt, my sister, and ask her for a needle and thread to make
you a shift."Now that aunt was a Baba Yaga. Well, the girl was no fool, so she went
to a real aunt of hers first, and says she, "Good morning, auntie!""Good morning, my dear! What have you come for?""Mother has sent me to her sister, to ask for a needle and thread to
make me a shift."Then her aunt instructed her what to do. "There is a birch tree there,
niece, which would hit you in the eye -- you must tie a ribbon round it;
there are doors which would creak and bang -- you must pour oil on their
hinges; there are dogs which would tear you in pieces -- you must throw
them these rolls; there is a cat which would scratch your eyes out -- you
must give it a piece of bacon."So the girl went away, and walked and walked, till she came to the
place. There stood a hut, and in it sat weaving the Baba Yaga, the
bony-shanks."Good morning, auntie," says the girl."Good morning, my dear," replies the Baba Yaga." Mother has sent me to ask you for a needle and thread to make me a
shift.""Very well; sit down and weave a little in the meantime."So the girl sat down behind the loom, and the Baba Yaga went outside,
and said to her servant maid, "Go and heat the bath, and get my niece
washed; and mind you look sharp after her. I want to breakfast off her."Well, the girl sat there in such a fright that she was as much dead as
alive. Presently she spoke imploringly to the servant maid, saying,
"Kinswoman dear, do please wet the firewood instead of making it burn; and
fetch the water for the bath in a sieve." And she made her a present of a
handkerchief.The Baba Yaga waited awhile; then she came to the window and asked,
"Are you weaving, niece? Are you weaving, my dear?""Oh yes, dear aunt, I'm weaving."So the Baba Yaga went away again, and the girl gave the cat a piece of
bacon, and asked, "Is there no way of escaping from here?""Here's a comb for you and a towel," said the cat; "take them, and be
off. The Baba Yaga will pursue you, but you must lay your ear on the
ground, and when you hear that she is close at hand, first of all, throw
down the towel. It will become a wide, wide river. And if the Baba Yaga
gets across the river, and tries to catch you, then you must lay your ear
on the ground again, and when you hear that she is close at hand, throw
down the comb. It will become a dense, dense forest; through that she
won't be able to force her way anyhow."The girl took the towel and the comb and fled. The dogs would have rent
her, but she threw them the rolls, and they let her go by; the doors would
have begun to bang, but she poured oil on their hinges, and they let her
pass through; the birch tree would have poked her eyes out, but she tied
the ribbon around it, and it let her pass on. And the cat sat down to the
loom, and worked away; muddled everything about, if it didn't do much
weaving.Up came the Baba Yaga to the window, and asked, "Are you weaving,
niece? Are you weaving, my dear?""I'm weaving, dear aunt, I'm weaving," gruffly replied the cat.The Baba Yaga rushed into the hut, saw that the girl was gone, and took
to beating the cat, and abusing it for not having scratched the girl's
eyes out. "Long as I've served you," said the cat, "you've never given me
so much as a bone; but she gave me bacon." Then the Baba Yaga pounced upon
the dogs, on the doors, on the birch tree, and on the servant maid, and
set to work to abuse them all, and to knock them about.Then the dogs said to her, "Long as we've served you, you've never so
much as pitched us a burnt crust; but she gave us rolls to eat."And the doors said, "Long as we've served you, you've never poured even
a drop of water on our hinges; but she poured oil on us."The birch tree said, "Long as I've served you, you've never tied a
single thread around me; but she fastened a ribbon around me."And the servant maid said, "Long as I've served you, you've never given
me so much as a rag; but she gave me a handkerchief."The Baba Yaga, bony of limb, quickly jumped into her mortar, sent it
flying along with the pestle, sweeping away the while all traces of its
flight with a broom, and set off in pursuit of the girl. Then the girl put
her ear to the ground, and when she heard that the Baba Yaga was chasing
her, and was now close at hand, she flung down the towel. And it became a
wide, such a wide river! Up came the Baba Yaga to the river, and gnashed
her teeth with spite; then she went home for her oxen, and drove them to
the river. The oxen drank up every drop of the river, and then the Baba
Yaga began the pursuit anew. But the girl put her ear to the ground again,
and when she heard that the Baba Yaga was near, she flung down the comb,
and instantly a forest sprang up, such an awfully thick one! The Baba Yaga
began gnawing away at it, but however hard she worked, she couldn't gnaw
her way through it, so she had to go back again.But by this time the girl's father had returned home, and he asked,
"Where's my daughter?""She's gone to her aunt's," replied her stepmother.Soon afterwards the girl herself came running home." Where have you been?" asked her father."Ah, father!" she said, "mother sent me to aunt's to ask for a needle
and thread to make me a shift. But aunt's a Baba Yaga, and she wanted to
eat me!""And how did you get away, daughter?""Why like this," said the girl, and explained the whole matter. As soon
as her father had heard all about it, he became wroth with his wife, and
shot her. But he and his daughter lived on and flourished, and everything
went well with them.Source: W. R. S. Ralston,Russian Folk-Tales(London: Smith,
Elder, and Company, 1873),pp. 139-42.Type 313H*.Ralston's source: Aleksandr Afanasyev.Return to thetable of contents.The Wicked StepmotherKashmirOne day a Brahman adjured his wife not to eat anything without him lest
she should become a she goat. In reply the Brahman's wife begged him not
to eat anything without her, lest he should be changed into a tiger. A
long time passed by and neither of them broke their word, until one day
the Brahman's wife, while giving food to her children, herself took a
little to taste; and her husband was not present. That very moment she was
changed into a goat.When the Brahman came home and saw the she goat running about the house
he was intensely grieved, because he knew that it was none other than his
own beloved wife. He kept the goat tied up in the yard of his house, and
tended it very carefully.In a few years he married again, but this wife was not kind to the
children. She at once took a dislike to them, and treated them unkindly
and gave them little food. Their mother, the she goat, heard their
complainings, and noticed that they were getting thin, and therefore
called one of them to her secretly, and bade the child tell the others to
strike her horns with a stick whenever they were very hungry, and some
food would fall down for them. They did so, and instead of getting weaker
and thinner, as their stepmother had expected, they became stronger and
stronger. She was surprised to see them getting so fat and strong while
she was giving them so little food.In course of time a one-eyed daughter was born to this wicked woman.
She loved the girl with all her heart, and grudged not any expense or
attention that she thought the child required. One day, when the girl had
grown quite big and could walk and talk well, her mother sent her to play
with the other children, and ordered her to notice how and whence they
obtained anything to eat. The girl promised to do so, and most rigidly
stayed by them the whole day, and saw all that happened.On hearing that the goat supplied her stepchildren with food the woman
got very angry, and determined to kill the beast as soon as possible. She
pretended to be very ill, and sending for the hakim, bribed him to
prescribe some goat's flesh for her. The Brahman was very anxious about
his wife's state, and although he grieved to have to slay the goat (for he
was obliged to kill the goat, not having money to purchase another), yet
he did not mind if his wife really recovered. But the little children wept
when they heard this, and went to their mother, the she goat, in great
distress, and told her everything."Do not weep, my darlings," she said. "It is much better for me to die
than to live such a life as this. Do not weep. I have no fear concerning
you. Food will be provided for you, if you will attend to my instructions.
Be sure to gather my bones, and bury them all together in some secret
place, and whenever you are very hungry go to that place and ask for food.
Food will then be given you."The poor she goat gave this advice only just in time. Scarcely had it
finished these words and the children had departed than the butcher came
with a knife and slew it. Its body was cut into pieces and cooked, and the
stepmother had the meat, but the stepchildren got the bones. They did with
them as they had been directed, and thus got food regularly and in
abundance.Some time after the death of the she goat one morning one of the
stepdaughters was washing her face in the stream that ran by the house,
when her nose ring unfastened and fell into the water. A fish happened to
see it and swallowed it, and this fish was caught by a man and sold to the
king's cook for his majesty's dinner. Great was the surprise of the cook
when, on opening the fish to clean it, he found the nose ring. He took it
to the king, who was so interested in it that he issued a proclamation and
set it to every town and village in his dominions, that whosoever had
missed a nose ring should apply to him. Within a few days the brother of
the girl reported to the king that the nose ring belonged to his sister,
who had lost it one day while bathing her face in the river. The king
ordered the girl to appear before him, and was so fascinated by her pretty
face and nice manner that he married her, and provided amply for the
support of her family.Source: J. Hinton Knowles,Folk-Tales of Kashmir(London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner, and Company, 1893),pp. 127-29.Type 511.Return to thetable of contents.Maria and the Golden SlipperPhilippinesOnce there lived a couple who had an only daughter, Maria. When Maria was a little girl, her mother died. A few years later Maria's father fell in love with a widow named Juana, who had two daughters. The elder of these daughters was Rosa, and the younger was Damiana. When Maria was grown to be a young woman, her father married the woman Juana. Maria continued to live with her father and stepmother. But Juana and her two daughters treated Maria as a servant. She had to do all the work in the house: cook the food, wash the clothes, clean the floors. The only clothes she herself had to wear were ragged and dirty.One day Prince Malecadel wanted to get married, so he gave a ball, to which he invited all the ladies in his kingdom. He said that the most beautiful of all was to be his wife.When Damiana and Rosa knew that all the ladies were invited, they began to discuss what clothes they would wear to the ball; but poor Maria was in the river, washing the clothes. Maria was very sad and was weeping, for she had no clothes at all in which she could appear at the prince's fête.While she was washing, a crab approached her, and said, "Why are you crying, Maria? Tell me the reason, for I am your mother."Then Maria said to the crab, "I am treated by my aunt (sic!) and sisters as a servant; and there will be a ball tonight, but I have no clothes to wear."While she was talking to the crab, Juana came up. The stepmother was very angry with Maria, and ordered her to catch the crab  and cook it for their dinner. Maria seized the crab and carried it to the house. At first she did not want to cook it, for she knew that it was her mother; but Juana whipped her so hard, that at last she was forced to obey.Before it was put in the earthen pot to be cooked, the crab said to Maria, "Maria, don't eat my flesh, but collect all my shell after I am eaten, and bury the pieces in the garden near the house. They will grow into a tree, and you can have what you want if you will only ask the tree for it."After her parents had eaten the flesh of the crab, Maria collected all its shell and buried it in the garden. At twilight she saw a tree standing on the very spot where she had buried the shell.When night came, Rosa and Damiana went to the ball, and Juana retired for the night as soon as her daughters were gone. When Maria saw that her aunt was sleeping, she went into the garden and asked the tree for what she wanted. The tree changed her clothes into very beautiful ones, and furnished her with a fine coach drawn by four fine horses, and a pair of golden slippers.Before she left, the tree said to her, "You must be in your house before twelve o'clock. If you are not, your clothes will be changed into ragged, dirty ones again, and your coach will disappear."After promising to remember the warning of the tree, Maria went to the ball, where she was received by the prince very graciously. All the ladies were astonished when they saw her; she was the most beautiful of all. Then she sat between her two sisters, but neither Rosa nor Damiana recognized her. The prince danced with her all the time. When Maria saw that it was half-past eleven, she bade farewell to the prince and all the ladies present, and went home. When she reached the garden, the tree changed her beautiful clothes back into her old ones, and the coach disappeared. Then she went to bed and to sleep. When her sisters came home, they told her of everything that had happened at the ball.The next night the prince gave another ball. After Rosa and Damiana had dressed themselves in their best clothes and gone, Maria again went to the garden to ask for beautiful clothes. This time she was given a coach drawn by five (?) horses, and again the tree warned her to return before twelve. The prince was delighted to see her, and danced with her the whole evening. Maria was so enchanted that she forgot to notice the time. While she was dancing, she heard the clock striking twelve. She ran as fast as she could down stairs and out the palace door, but in her haste she dropped one of her golden slippers. This night she had to walk home, and in her old ragged clothes, too. One of her golden slippers she had with her; but the other, which she had dropped at the door, was found by one of the guards, who gave it to the prince. The guard said that the slipper had been lost by the beautiful lady who ran out of the palace when the clock was striking twelve.Then the prince said to all the people present, "The lady whom this slipper fits is to be my wife."The next morning the prince ordered one of his guards to carry the slipper to every house in the city to see if its owner could be found. The first house visited was the one in which Maria lived. Rosa tried to put the slipper on her foot, but her foot was much too big. Then Damiana put it on her foot, but her foot was too small. The two sisters tried and tried again to make the slipper fit, but in vain.Then Maria told them that she would try, and see if the slipper would fit her foot; but her sisters said to her, "Your feet are very dirty. This golden slipper will not go on your foot, for your feet are larger than ours." And they laughed at her.But the guard who had brought the slipper said, "Let her try. It is the prince's order that all shall try."So he gave it to Maria. Then Maria put it on, and it fitted her foot exactly. She then drew the other slipper from underneath her dress, and put it on her other foot. When the two sisters saw the two slippers on Maria's feet, they almost fainted with astonishment.So Maria became the wife of the prince, and from that time on she was very dear to her sisters and aunt.Source: Dean S. Fansler,Filipino Popular Tales(Lancaster, PA, and New York: American Folk-Lore Society, 1921),no. 45B, pp. 314-16.Fansler's source: "Narrated by Dolores Zafra, a Tagalog from Pagsanjan, Laguna. She says that this is a Tagalog story, and was told to her when she was a little girl."Return to thetable of contents.The Poor Turkey GirlNative American (Zuni)Long, long ago, our ancients had neither sheep nor horses nor cattle; yet they had domestic animals of various kinds -- amongst them turkeys.In Mátsake, or the Salt City, there dwelt at this time many very wealthy families, who possessed large flocks of these birds, which it was their custom to have their slaves or the poor people of the town herd in the plains round about Thunder Mountain, below which their town stood, and on the mesas beyond.Now, in Mátsake at this time there stood, away out near the border of the town, a little tumble-down, single-room house, wherein there lived alone a very poor girl, -- so poor that her clothes were patched and tattered and dirty, and her person, on account of long neglect and ill-fare, shameful to look upon, though she herself was not ugly, but had a winning face and bright eyes; that is, if the face had been more oval and the eyes less oppressed with care.So poor was she that she herded turkeys for a living; and little was given to her except the food she subsisted on from day to day, and perhaps now and then a piece of old, worn-out clothing.Like the extremely poor everywhere and at all times, she was humble, and by her longing for kindness, which she never received, she was made kind even to the creatures that depended upon her, and lavished this kindness upon the turkeys she drove to and from the plains every day. Thus, the turkeys, appreciating this, were very obedient. They loved their mistress so much that at her call they would unhesitatingly come, or at her behest go whithersoever and whensoever she wished.One day this poor girl, driving her turkeys down into the plains, passed near Old Zuni, -- the Middle Ant Hill of the World, as our ancients have taught us to call our home, -- and as she went along, she heard the herald-priest proclaiming from the housetop that the Dance of the Sacred Bird (which is a very blessed and welcome festival to our people, especially to the youths and maidens who are permitted to join in the dance) would take place in four days.Now, this poor girl had never been permitted to join in or even to watch the great festivities of our people or the people in the neighboring towns, and naturally she longed very much to see this dance. But she put aside her longing, because she reflected: "It is impossible that I should watch, much less join in the Dance of the Sacred Bird, ugly and ill-clad as I am."And thus musing to herself, and talking to her turkeys, as was her custom, she drove them on, and at night returned them to their cages round the edges and in the plazas of the town.Every day after that, until the day named for the dance, this poor girl, as she drove her turkeys out in the morning, saw the people busy in cleaning and preparing their garments, cooking delicacies, and otherwise making ready for the festival to which they had been duly invited by the other villagers, and heard them talking and laughing merrily at the prospect of the coming holiday. So, as she went about with her turkeys through the day, she would talk to them, though she never dreamed that they understood a word of what she was saying.It seems that they did understand even more than she said to them, for on the fourth day, after the people of Mátsake had all departed toward Zuni, and the girl was wandering around the plains alone with her turkeys, one of the big gobblers strutted up to her, and making a fan of his tail, and skirts, as it were, of his wings, blushed with pride and puffed with importance, stretched out his neck and said: "Maiden mother, we know what your thoughts are, and truly we pity you, and wish that, like the other people of Mátsake, you might enjoy this holiday in the town below. We have said to ourselves at night, after you have placed us safely and comfortably in our cages: 'Truly our maiden mother is as worthy to enjoy these things as any one in Mátsake, or even Zuni.' Now, listen well, for I speak the speech of all the elders of my people: If you will drive us in early this afternoon, when the dance is most gay and the people are most happy, we will help you to make yourself so handsome and so prettily dressed that never a man, woman, or child amongst all those who are assembled at the dance will know you; but rather, especially the young men, will wonder whence you came, and long to lay hold of your hand in the circle that forms round the altar to dance. Maiden mother, would you like to go to see this dance, and even to join in it, and be merry with the best of your people?"The poor girl was at first surprised. Then it seemed all so natural that the turkeys should talk to her as she did to them, that she sat down on a little mound, and, leaning over, looked at them and said: "My beloved turkeys, how glad I am that we may speak together! But why should you tell me of things that you full well know I so long to, but cannot by any possible means, do?""Trust in us," said the old gobbler, "for I speak the speech of my people, and when we begin to call and call and gobble and gobble, and turn toward our home in Mátsake, do you follow us, and we will show you what we can do for you. Only let me tell you one thing: No one knows how much happiness and good fortune may come to you if you but enjoy temperately the pleasures we enable you to participate in. But if, in the excess of your enjoyment, you should forget us, who are your friends, yet so much depend upon you, then we will think: 'Behold, this our maiden mother, though so humble and poor, deserves, forsooth, her hard life, because, were she more prosperous, she would be unto others as others now are unto her.'""Never fear, O my turkeys," cried the maiden, -- only half trusting that they could do so much for her, yet longing to try, -- "never fear. In everything you direct me to do I will be obedient as you always have been to me."The sun had scarce begun to decline, when the turkeys of their own accord turned homeward, and the maiden followed them, light of heart. They knew their places well, and immediately ran to them. When all had entered, even their bare-legged children, the old gobbler called to the maiden, saying: "Enter our house."She therefore went in."Now, maiden, sit down," said he, "and give to me and my companions, one by one, your articles of clothing. We will see if we cannot renew them."The maiden obediently drew off the ragged old mantle that covered her shoulders and cast it on the ground before the speaker. He seized it in his beak, and spread it out, and picked and picked at it; then he trod upon it, and lowering his wings, began to strut back and forth over it. Then taking it up in his beak, and continuing to strut, he puffed and puffed, and laid it down at the feet of the maiden, a beautiful white embroidered cotton mantle. Then another gobbler came forth, and she gave him another article of dress, and then another and another, until each garment the maiden had worn was new and as beautiful as any possessed by her mistresses in Mátsake.Before the maiden donned all these garments, the turkeys circled about her, singing and singing, and clucking and clucking, and brushing her with their wings, until her person was as clean and her skin as smooth and bright as that of the fairest maiden of the wealthiest home in Mátsake. Her hair was soft and wavy, instead of being an ugly, sun-burnt shock; her cheeks were full and dimpled, and her eyes dancing with smiles, -- for she now saw how true had been the words of the turkeys.Finally, one old turkey came forward and said: "Only the rich ornaments worn by those who have many possessions are lacking to thee, O maiden mother. Wait a moment. We have keen eyes, and have gathered many valuable things, -- as such things, being small, though precious, are apt to be lost from time to time by men and maidens."Spreading his wings, he trod round and round upon the ground, throwing his head back, and laying his wattled beard on his neck; and, presently beginning to cough, he produced in his beak a beautiful necklace; another turkey brought forth earrings, and so on, until all the proper ornaments appeared, befitting a well-clad maiden of the olden days, and were laid at the feet of the poor turkey girl.With these beautiful things she decorated herself, and, thanking the turkeys over and over, she started to go, and they called out: "O maiden mother, leave open the wicket, for who knows whether you will remember your turkeys or not when your fortunes are changed, and if you will not grow ashamed that you have been the maiden mother of turkeys? But we love you, and would bring you to good fortune. Therefore, remember our words of advice, and do not tarry too long.""I will surely remember, O my Turkeys!" answered the maiden.Hastily she sped away down the river path to ward Zuni. When she arrived there, she went in at the western side of the town and through one of the long covered ways that lead into the dance court. When she came just inside of the court, behold, everyone began to look at her, and many murmurs ran through the crowd, -- murmurs of astonishment at her beauty and the richness of her dress, - and the people were all asking one another, "Whence comes this beautiful maiden?"Not long did she stand there neglected. The chiefs of the dance, all gorgeous in their holiday attire, hastily came to her, and, with apologies for the incompleteness of their arrangements, -- though these arrangements were as complete as they possibly could be, -- invited her to join the youths and maidens dancing round the musicians and the altar in the center of the plaza. With a blush and a smile and a toss of her hair over her eyes, the maiden stepped into the circle, and the finest youths among the dancers vied with one another for her hand. Her heart became light and her feet merry, and the music sped her breath to rapid coming and going, and the warmth swept over her face, and she danced and danced until the sun sank low in the west.But, alas! In the excess of her enjoyment, she thought not of her turkeys, or, if she thought of them, she said to herself, "How is this, that I should go away from the most precious consideration to my flock of gobbling turkeys? I will stay a while longer, and just before the sun sets I will run back to them, that these people may not see who I am, and that I may have the joy of hearing them talk day after day and wonder who the girl was who joined in their dance."So the time sped on, and another dance was called, and another, and never a moment did the people let her rest; but they would have her in every dance as they moved around the musicians and the altar in the center of the plaza.At last the sun set, and the dance was well-nigh over, when, suddenly breaking away, the girl ran out, and, being swift of foot, -- more so than most of the people of her village, -- she sped up the river path before any one could follow the course she had taken.Meantime, as it grew late, the turkeys began to wonder and wonder that their maiden mother did not return to them. At last a gray old gobbler mournfully exclaimed, "It is as we might have expected. She has forgotten us; therefore is she not worthy of better things than those she has been accustomed to. Let us go forth to the mountains and endure no more of this irksome captivity, inasmuch as we may no longer think our maiden mother as good and true as once we thought her."So, calling and calling to one another in loud voices, they trooped out of their cage and ran up toward the Canyon of the Cottonwoods, and then round behind Thunder Mountain, through the Gateway of Zuni, and so on up the valley.All breathless, the maiden arrived at the open wicket and looked in. Behold, not a turkey was there! Trailing them, she ran and she ran up the valley to overtake them; but they were far ahead, and it was only after a long time that she came within the sound of their voices, and then, redoubling her speed, well-nigh overtook them, when she heard them singing this song :Up the river,to! to!Up the river,to! to!Singye ye!Up the river,to! to!Up the river,to! to!Singyee huli huli!Oh, our maiden motherTo the Middle PlaceTo dance went away;Therefore as she lingers,To the Canyon MesaAnd the plains above itWe all run away!Singye yee huli huli,Tot-tot, tot-tot, tot-tot,Huli huli!Tot-tot, tot-tot, tot-tot,Huli huli!Hearing this, the maiden called to her turkeys; called and called in vain. They only quickened their steps, spreading their wings to help them along, singing the song over and over until, indeed, they came to the base of the Canyon Mesa, at the borders of the Zuni Mountains. Then singing once more their song in full chorus, they spread wide their wings, andthlakwa-a-a, thlakwa-a-a, they fluttered away over the plains above.The poor turkey girl threw her hands up and looked down at her dress. With dust and sweat, behold! it was changed to what it had been, and she was the same poor turkey girl that she was be fore. Weary, grieving, and despairing, she returned to Mátsake.Thus it was in the days of the ancients. Therefore, where you see the rocks leading up to the top of Canyon Mesa (Shoya-k'oskwi), there are the tracks of turkeys and other figures to be seen. The latter are the song that the turkeys sang, graven in the rocks; and all over the plains along the borders of Zuni Mountains since that day turkeys have been more abundant than in any other place.After all, the gods dispose of men according as men are fitted; and if the poor be poor in heart and spirit as well as in appearance, how will they be aught but poor to the end of their days?Thus shortens my story.Source: Frank Hamilton Cushing,Zuni Folk Tales(New York and London: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1901),pp. 54-64.Return to thetable of contents.The Turkey HerdNative American (Zuni)Long ago at Kyakima lived a girl who spent all her time herding
turkeys. She never did anything for her sisters. Nobody would comb
her hair. It was all in a snarl. Her sisters would tell her to cook.
They would say, "Why do you so love the turkeys?" She did not
answer. After her sisters had cooked, she would take the bread and
go out and tend the turkeys.At Matsaki they were dancinglapalehakya (lapa>lapapoawe,"parrots;"lahakya,"tell").They were dancing for the third time, when
the turkey girl said, "Younger sisters [ahani]!"The turkeys said, "What?"The girl said, "I want to go and see the dance."The turkeys said, "You are too dirty to go."She repeated, "I want to go."
The turkeys said, "Let us eat the lice out of her hair!"Then each ate lice from her hair.Then an elder-sister (kyauu) turkey clapped
her wings, and down from the air fell women's moccasins (mokwawe).
Then her younger sister (ikina) clapped her wings, and down from the
air fell a blanket dress (yatone). Then another elder sister clapped
her wings, and down from the air fell a belt (ehnina). A younger
sister clapped her wings, and apitonefell down. An elder sister
clapped, and a blanket (eha) fell down. The little younger sister
(an hani tsanna) clapped, and a hair belt (tsutokehnina) fell
down.An kyauusaid, "Is this all you want?"The girl said, "Yes." She put on the moccasins and theehayatonana.The turkeys put up her hair in a queue.She said to the turkeys, "I will come back before sundown."She went to her house, and made a little cloth bag, and filled it with meal. Then she went on to Matsaki.Her sisters said, "Has she gone to the dance?"One said, "Yes."-- "She is too dirty to go."After she reached Matsaki, as she stood there, the dance director (otakya mosi) asked if she would dance.She said, "Yes." She danced all day. When the sun set,
she finished dancing, and ran back to the turkeys.The turkeys had said, when she did not come, "We must not go on living here. Our sister does not love us."When she arrived, they were not there.
They were on top of a little hill, singing:Kyana to tokyana to tokyana to to yeuli uli uli to to to to.They flew down to Kyakima. They went on as fast as they could
until they came to turkey tracks (tonateanawa). There they drank
at the spring. Their tracks were from north, south, east, west.
After they drank, they flew to Shoakoskwikwi. They reached a high
rock. They sat on it, and sang:Kyana to tokyana to tokyana to to yeuli uli uli to to to to.Whenawan kyauuarrived, the turkeys were not there. She saw
their tracks. She followed the tracks on a run. At Tonateanawa
she saw where they had drunk. She ran on. Then she lost their
tracks. She went back to her house. The turkeys had flown to
Shoakoskwikwi, to the spring there. That is why at Shoakoskwikwi
you see wild turkeys. The girl came back to her house crying.Her
sisters said, "Don't cry! You did not return on time. You did not
love them."The girl stayed and cooked for her sisters. Thus it was long ago.Source:Elsie Clews Parsons, "Pueblo-Indian Folk-Tales, Probably of Spanish Provenience,"Journal of American Folklorevol. 31, no. 120 (April - June 1918), pp. 234-35.Parsons' source: "Tsatiselu of Zuni."Note by Parsons: "This is, I suggest, a Cinderella tale, the pattern in regard to the sisters being confused."Return to thetable of contents.The Indian CinderellaNative AmericanOn the shores of a wide bay on the Atlantic coast there dwelt in old times a great Indian warrior. It was said that he had been one of Glooskap's best helpers and friends, and that he had done for him many wonderful deeds. But that, no man knows. He had, however, a very wonderful and strange power; he could make himself invisible; he could thus mingle unseen with his enemies and listen to their plots. He was known among the people as Strong Wind, the Invisible. He dwelt with his sister in a tent near the sea, and his sister helped him greatly in his work. Many maidens would have been glad to marry him, and he was much sought after because of his mighty deeds; and it was known that Strong Wind would marry the first maiden who could see him as he came home at night. Many made the trial, but it was a long time before one succeeded.Strong Wind used a clever trick to test the truthfulness of all who sought to win him. Each evening as the day went down, his sister walked on the beach with any girl who wished to make the trial. His sister could always see him, but no one else could see him. And as he came home from work in the twilight, his sister as she saw him drawing near would ask the girl who sought him, "Do you see him?"And each girl would falsely answer "Yes."And his sister would ask, "With what does he draw his sled?"And each girl would answer, "With the hide of a moose," or "With a pole," or "With a great cord."And then his sister would know that they all had lied, for their answers were mere guesses. And many tried and lied and failed, for Strong Wind would not marry any who were untruthful.There lived in the village a great chief who had three daughters. Their mother had long been dead. One of these was much younger than the others. She was very beautiful and gentle and well beloved by all, and for that reason her older sisters were very jealous of her charms and treated her very cruelly. They clothed her in rags that she might be ugly; and they cut off her long black hair; and they burned her face with coals from the fire that she might be scarred and disfigured. And they lied to their father, telling him that she had done these things herself. But the young girl was patient and kept her gentle heart and went gladly about her work.Like other girls, the chief's two eldest daughters tried to win Strong Wind. One evening, as the day went down, they walked on the shore with Strong Wind's sister and waited for his coming. Soon he came home from his day's work, drawing his sled. And his sister asked as usual, "Do you see him?"And each one, lying, answered "Yes."And she asked, "Of what is his shoulder strap made?"And each, guessing, said "Of rawhide."Then they entered the tent where they hoped to see Strong Wind eating his supper; and when he took off his coat and his moccasins they could see them, but more than these they saw nothing. And Strong Wind knew that they had lied, and he kept himself from their sight, and they went home dismayed.One day the chief's youngest daughter with her rags and her burnt face resolved to seek Strong Wind. She patched her clothes with bits of birch bark from the trees, and put on the few little ornaments she possessed, and went forth to try to see the Invisible One as all the other girls of the village had done before. And her sisters laughed at her and called her "fool"; and as she passed along the road all the people laughed at her because of her tattered frock and her burnt face, but silently she went her way.Strong Wind's sister received the little girl kindly, and at twilight she took her to the beach. Soon Strong Wind came home drawing his sled. And his sister asked, "Do you see him?"And the girl answered "No," and his sister wondered greatly because she spoke the truth.And again she asked, "Do you see him now?"And the girl answered, "Yes, and he is very wonderful."And she asked, "With what does he draw his sled?"And the girl answered, "With the Rainbow," and she was much afraid.And she asked further, "Of what is his bowstring?"And the girl answered, "His bowstring is the Milky Way."Then Strong Wind's sister knew that because the girl had spoken the truth at first her brother had made himself visible to her. And she said, "Truly, you have seen him." And she took her home and bathed her, and all the scars disappeared from her face and body; and her hair grew long and black again like the raven's wing; and she gave her fine clothes to wear and many rich ornaments. Then she bade her take the wife's seat in the tent.Soon Strong Wind entered and sat beside her, and called her his bride. The very next day she became his wife, and ever afterwards she helped him to do great deeds.The girl's two elder sisters were very cross and they wondered greatly at what had taken place. But Strong Wind, who knew of their cruelty, resolved to punish them. Using his great power, he changed them both into aspen trees and rooted them in the earth. And since that day the leaves of the aspen have always trembled, and they shiver in fear at the approach of Strong Wind, it matters not how softly he comes, for they are still mindful of his great power and anger because of their lies and their cruelty to their sister long ago.